# Introduction

<?rfc toc="yes"?>
<?rfc symrefs="yes"?>
<?rfc sortrefs="yes"?>
<?rfc subcompact="no"?>
<?rfc compact="yes"?>
<?rfc comments="yes"?>

While IP-SFS [](#RFC4824) makes it possible to transmit Internet protocols
over semaphore signalling systems such as Clacks, the reverse is not always
the case. Information sent in the Overhead may be lost when Clacks messages
are sent using HTTP.

This document specifies HTTP headers for transmitting Overhead messages
that originate or are intended for Clacks towers.

## Syntax Notation

This specification uses the Augmented Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) notation of [](#RFC5234)
and includes, by reference, the "token", "word", "OWS", and "BWS" rules and
the #rule extension as defined within Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.4 of [](#RFC7230).

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in [](#RFC2119).

# The Clacks Protocol

Clacks is a semaphore signalling system invented by Robert Dearheart. It is the
primary means of communication between city-states along The Grand Trunk. In a
Clacks network a Tower transmits message packets to peers selected by either a
minimum-cost or nearest-neighbor algorithm depending on the packet class. The
packet payload is either a regular Clacks as input directly by a user or a user
agent, or an Overhead packet for transmitting side channel data between Towers.

    +------------------------+
    |          Code          |
    +------------------------+
    |Tower Address (optional)|
    +------------------------+
    |                        |
    //    Overhead Body      //
    |                        |
    +------------------------+
^[fig:packet::An Overhead packet.]

An Overhead message begins with a Clacks Code. A Code is a sequence of upper-case
letters with the order of letters being significant. Some Codes require a Tower
Address which is sent immediately after the Code. The Code and Tower Address are
always sent in the Plain. A registry of Clacks Codes is maintained by the Grand
Trunk Semaphore Company, Ankh Morpork.

The Overhead body may be encoded to shorten the message or conceal it from
eavesdropping. A message that is not encoded is sent "in the Plain" or just
"Plain" In many cases the Code alone is sufficient instruction to the Clacks
Demon and further interpretation of the message body is not required. For this
reason Clacks Towers, MUST be able to accept messages with an unknown encoding.

# Clacks-over-HTTP Gateways

The Clacks networks of Discworld interface with the Internet of Roundworld at
gateway Towers. Clacks messages that arrive at the Tower are read by a Demon
(alternately a Dwarf, Troll, or the occasional quick-fingered Human) then
forwarded to an Internet connected computer with appropriate HTTP headers
applied. The Demon will activate the Clacks shutters when data is received
from the Internet.

A Gateway MUST send one HTTP request for each regular Clacks message. Because
Overhead messages are transmitted more frequently on a Clacks network, sending
a request for each message is inefficient. A Gateway MUST buffer incoming
Overhead messages. One or more buffered messages are forwarded when one of the
following events occurs:

* A regular Clacks message is forwarded.
* The Demon has exhausted available memory for saving messages.
* The Demon is about to go down the ladder.

If Overhead messages are being sent without a Clacks message as the body of
the HTTP request then the Gateway MUST send a "HEAD" request. The Gateway
SHOULD send as many Overhead messages as possible when sending a request.


## Protocol Additions

The Clacks-over-HTTP extension specifies one header field which MAY be included
in a HTTP response or request, and one header field which MAY by included in
a HTTP request.

### The Clacks response field

The Clacks header field is used to transmit Overhead messages in an 
HTTP response or request. The Accept-Clacks header field is sent in
an HTTP request to indicate to a server that a client is able to
process Overhead messages. In the absence of an Accept-Clacks header
a server MAY respond with a Clacks message in the hope [](#HOPE)
that the client can do something with it and merely forgot to send the
Accept-Clacks header.

An Overhead message consists of a Clacks Code, an optional Tower Address, and
a possibly encoded message body. Servers SHOULD limit the length and number
of Clacks so as not to overwhelm the receiving Gateway Demon.

    Clacks          = 1#clacks-overhead
    clacks-overhead = clacks-code [ RWS tower-address ] RWS value
    tower-address   = token
    clacks-code     = 1*codechar
    codechar        = ALPHA
    value           = value-string / quoted-string / ext-value
    ext-value       = "=" charset "'" [ language ] "'" value-chars
                    ; like [RFC5987]

The 'codechar' above may refer to any uppercase letter; codes in common use
throughout the Clacks network are defined in the [](#GTSC-CLACKS).

### The Accept-Clacks header field

A Clacks-capable client SHOULD include in HTTP requests an Accept-Clacks
header indicating the Clacks codes and encodings it recognises. If a
valid Accept-Clacks header is received by a server then it MUST NOT
send Overhead message codes that are not indicated by the Accept-Clacks
header.

A client can refuse all Clacks responses with the Accept-Clacks header
value of "no". A server MUST NOT send a Clacks header if the request
refuses.

    Accept-Clacks  = "no" / accept-clacks-encoding
    accept-clacks-encoding = clacks-code RWS clacks-encodings
    clacks-encodings = "*" / ( token *( "/" token ) )

A Clacks-capable client MUST support "Plain" encoding. Other commonly used encodings are "RKN" Reverse-Klatchian Notation, and "Ook" also known as Simian Computer System for Information Interchange [](#SCSII) that is only used by the Clacks tower at Unseen University. 

### Examples

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Clacks: GNU John Dearheart

# IANA Considerations

The 'Clacks' header field has been added to the "Permanent Message Header
Field Names" registry defined in [](#RFC3864).
FIXME: not submitted yet

    Header field name: Clacks
    
    Applicable Protocol: HTTP
    
    Status: Standard
    
    Author: Sir Terry Pratchett (posthumously)
    
    Change controller: IETF
    
    Specification document: this specification

# Environmental Considerations

As noted in [](#the-clacks-protocol), a Clacks message sent via the traditional semaphore
network represents a significant expenditure of energy, not only in the
operation of the signalling panels, but in manual verification and message
passing. It is self-evident that this specification provides for a high
level of efficiency, utilizing existing infrastructure to provide the seamless
interaction that users of the Clacks network have come to expect.

# Security Considerations

This document represents an extension to [](#RFC7230) and all security considerations therein, or in documents updating or replacing that document, also apply to this one.

# Proxy considerations
Since all Clacks messages are effectively point-to-point transmissions there is very limited scope for multiple User-Agents to require the same message. Due to this any message with the Clacks header MUST be considered equivalent to the no-cache header defined in [](#RFC7234) Section 5.2.1.4 this allows for the cache to store the object as long as it is revalidated prior to sending.

# User-Agent considerations
A user-agent should follow the Grand Trunk Clacks standards [](#GTSC-CLACKS) for Overhead definition. 

Since the Clacks-over-HTTP gateway is expected to be a human (or Dwarf, Troll, etc.) operated process User-Agents need to cope with long session availability to provide the necessary time window to allow the message to be input.

# IP-SFS Tunnelling 
The Clacks-over-HTTP protocol makes available the option of tunnelling proprietary Clacks messages over an IP-SFS based network to allow for interconnection of different operator networks. 
